[WIP] Minimal ePBS without Max EB and 7002 (#2)
potuz/consensus-specs: specs/_features/epbs/builder.md

# ePBS -- Honest Builder

This is an accompanying document which describes the expected actions of a "builder" participating in the Ethereum proof-of-stake protocol.

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Builders attributions](#builders-attributions)
  - [Constructing the payload bid](#constructing-the-payload-bid)
  - [Constructing the `BlobSidecar`s](#constructing-the-blobsidecars)
  - [Constructing the execution payload envelope](#constructing-the-execution-payload-envelope)
  - [Honest payload withheld messages](#honest-payload-withheld-messages)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Introduction

> With the ePBS Fork, the protocol includes new staked participants of the protocol called *Builders*. While Builders are a subset of the validator set, they have extra attributions that are optional. Validators may opt to not be builders and as such we collect the set of guidelines for those validators that want to act as builders in this document. 

Reviewer: Maybe mention that a validator that is not a builder is called a proposer.

Author: I don't think this statement is true though.

## Builders attributions

> Builders can submit bids to produce execution payloads. They can broadcast these bids in the form of `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` objects, these objects encode a commitment to to reveal a full execution payload in exchange for a payment. When their bids are chosen by the corresponding proposer, builders are expected to broadcast an accompanying `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` object honoring the commitment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Builders can submit bids to produce execution payloads. They can broadcast these bids in the form of `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` objects, these objects encode a commitment to reveal an execution payload in exchange for a payment. When their bids are chosen by the corresponding proposer, builders are expected to broadcast an accompanying `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` object honoring the commitment. 
```

Thus, builders tasks are divided in two, submitting bids, and submitting payloads. 

### Constructing the payload bid

Builders can broadcast a payload bid for the current or the next slot's proposer to include. They produce a `SignedExecutionPayloadHeader` as follows. 

> Prior to constructing a payload, the builder **MUST** have a full `InclusionList` object from the proposer matching `state.previous_inclusion_list_proposer`. The signed summary for this inclusion list will be needed when revealing the full execution payload (see below). 

Reviewer 2: may be totally remove inclusion list for now?

Author: it will be removed in the EIP, I'll open a new PR in this repo based on Electra soon

1. Set `header.parent_block_hash` to the current head of the execution chain (this can be obtained from the beacon state as `state.last_block_hash`). 
2. Set `header.parent_block_root` to be the head of the consensus chain (this can be obtained from the beacon state as `hash_tree_root(state.latest_block_header)`. 
3. Construct an execution payload. This can be performed with an external execution engine with a call to `engine_getPayloadV4`. 
4. Set `header.block_hash` to be the block hash of the constructed payload, that is `payload.block_hash` 

> 5. Set `header.builder_index`  to be the validator index of the builder performing these actions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Set `header.builder_index` to be the validator index of the builder performing these actions. 
```

```python
def get_blob_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock,
                      blobs: Sequence[Blob],
                      blob_kzg_proofs: Sequence[KZGProof]) -> Sequence[BlobSidecar]:
    block = signed_block.message
    block_header = BeaconBlockHeader(
        slot=block.slot,
        proposer_index=block.proposer_index,
        parent_root=block.parent_root,
        state_root=block.state_root,
        body_root=hash_tree_root(block.body),
    )
    signed_block_header = SignedBeaconBlockHeader(message=block_header, signature=signed_block.signature)
    return [
        BlobSidecar(
            index=index,
            blob=blob,
            kzg_commitment=block.body.blob_kzg_commitments[index],
            kzg_proof=blob_kzg_proofs[index],
            signed_block_header=signed_block_header,
            kzg_commitment_inclusion_proof=compute_merkle_proof(
                block.body,
                GeneralizedIndex(KZG_GENERALIZED_INDEX_PREFIX + index),
            ),
        )
        for index, blob in enumerate(blobs)
    ]
```

### Constructing the execution payload envelope

> When a valid `SignedBeaconBlock`  has been published containing a signed commitment by the builder, the builder is later expected to broadcast the corresponding `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope`  that fulfils this commitment. See below for a special case of an *honestly withheld payload*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a valid `SignedBeaconBlock` has been published containing a signed commitment by the builder, the builder is later expected to broadcast the corresponding `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope` that fulfils this commitment. See below for a special case of an *honestly withheld payload*. 
```

Reviewer 3: I'd also recommend changing the wording to make it more clear that the proposer, not the builder, is publishing the `SignedBeaconBlock`:

```suggestion
When the proposer publishes a valid `SignedBeaconBlock` containing a signed commitment by the builder, the builder is later expected to broadcast the corresponding `SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope`  that fulfills this commitment. See below for a special case of an *honestly withheld payload*. 
```

To construct the `execution_payload_envelope` the builder must perform the following steps, we alias `header` to be the committed `ExecutionPayloadHeader` in the beacon block. 

> 1. Set the `payload` field to be the `ExecutionPayload`  constructed when creating the corresponding bid. This payload **MUST** have the same block hash as `header.block_hash`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Set the `payload` field to be the `ExecutionPayload` constructed when creating the corresponding bid. This payload **MUST** have the same block hash as `header.block_hash`. 
```

> 2. Set the `builder_index`  field to be the validator index of the builder performing these steps. This field **MUST** be `header.builder_index`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set the `builder_index` field to be the validator index of the builder performing these steps. This field **MUST** be `header.builder_index`. 
```

3. Set `beacon_block_root` to be the `hash_tree_root` of the corresponding beacon block.

> 4. Set `blob_kzg_commitments`  to be the `commitments`  field of the blobs bundle constructed when constructing the bid. This field **MUST** have a `hash_tree_root` equal to `header.blob_kzg_commitments_root`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Set `blob_kzg_commitments` to be the `commitments` field of the blobs bundle constructed when constructing the bid. This field **MUST** have a `hash_tree_root` equal to `header.blob_kzg_commitments_root`.
```

5. Set `inclusion_list_proposer_index` to be the `inclusion_list_summary.proposer_index` from the inclusion list used when creating the bid. 
6. Set `inclusion_list_slot` to be the `inclusion_list_summary.slot` from the inclusion list used when creating the bid.
7. Set the `inclusion_list_signature` to be `signed_inclusion_list_summary.signature` from the inclusion list used when creating the bid. 
8. Set `payload_witheld` to `False`.

> After setting these parameters, the builder should run run `process_execution_payload(state, signed_envelope, verify=False)` and this function should not trigger an exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After setting these parameters, the builder should run `process_execution_payload(state, signed_envelope, verify=False)` and this function should not trigger an exception.
```

9. Set `state_root` to `hash_tree_root(state)`. 
After preparing the `envelope` the builder should sign the envelope using:
```python
def get_execution_payload_envelope_signature(state: BeaconState, envelope: ExecutionPayloadEnvelope, privkey: int) -> BLSSignature:
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_BUILDER, compute_epoch_at_slot(state.slot))
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(envelope, domain)
    return bls.Sign(privkey, signing_root)
```
The builder assembles then `signed_exceution_payload_envelope = SignedExecutionPayloadEnvelope(message=envelope, signature=signature)` and broadcasts it on the `execution_payload` global gossip topic. 

### Honest payload withheld messages

> An honest builder that has seen a `SignedBeaconBlock` referencing his signed bid, but that block was not timely and thus it is not the head of the builder's chain, may choose to withhold their execution payload. For this the builder should simply act as if it were building an empty payload, without any transactions, withdrawals, etc. Omit step 9 above and set `payload_withheld` to `True`. If the PTC sees this message and votes for it, validators will attribute a *withholding boost* to the builder, which would increase the forkchoice weight of the parent block, favouring it and preventing the builder from being charged for the bid by not revealing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An honest builder that has seen a `SignedBeaconBlock` referencing his signed bid, but that block was not timely and thus it is not the head of the builder's chain, may choose to withhold their execution payload. For this the builder should simply act as if it were building an empty payload, without any transactions, withdrawals, etc. Omit step 9 above and set `payload_withheld` to `True`. If the Payload Committee sees this message and votes for it, validators will attribute a *withholding boost* to the builder, which would increase the forkchoice weight of the parent block, favouring it and preventing the builder from being charged for the bid by not revealing. 
```
